<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>LX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-60" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>CHAPTER LX</h2>
			<p>GERARD walked silently beside Teresa, wondering in his own mind, after the manner of artists, what she was going to do with him; instead of asking her. So at last she told him of her own accord. A friend had informed her of a working goldsmith's wife who wanted a writer. "Her shop is hard by; you will not have far to go."</p>
			<p>Accordingly they soon arrived at the goldsmith's wife.</p>
			<p>"Madama," said Teresa, "Leonora tells me you want a writer: I have brought you a beautiful one, he saved my child at sea. Prithee look on him with favour."</p>
			<p>The goldsmith's wife complied in one sense. She fixed her eyes on Gerard's comely face, and could hardly take them off again. But her reply was unsatisfactory. "Nay, I have no use for a writer. Ah! I mind now, it is my gossip, Clælia, the sausage-maker, wants one; she told me, and I told Leonora."</p>
			<p>Teresa made a courteous speech and withdrew.</p>
			<p>Clælia lived at some distance, and when they reached her house she was out. Teresa said calmly, "I will await her return," and sat so still, and dignified, and statuesque, that Gerard was beginning furtively to draw her, when Clælia returned.</p>
			<p>"Madama, I hear from the goldsmith's wife, the excellent Olympia, that you need a writer" (here she took Gerard by the hand and led him forward); "I have brought you a beautiful one, he saved my child from the cruel waves. For our Lady's sake look with favour on him."</p>
			<p>"My good dame, my fair Ser," said Clælia, "I have no use for a writer; but now you remind me, it was my friend Appia Claudia asked me for one but the other day. She is a tailor, lives in the Via Lepida."</p>
			<p>Teresa retired calmly.</p>
			<p>"Madama," said Gerard, "this is likely to be a tedious business for you."</p>
			<p>Teresa opened her eyes.</p>
			<p>"What was ever done without a little patience?" She added mildly, "We will knock at every door at Rome but you shall have justice."</p>
			<p>"But madama, I think we are dogged. I noticed a man that follows us, sometimes afar, sometimes close."</p>
			<p>"I have seen it," said Teresa, coldly: but her cheek coloured faintly. "It is my poor Lodovico."</p>
			<p>She stopped and turned, and beckoned with her finger.</p>
			<p>A figure approached them somewhat unwillingly.</p>
			<p>When he came up, she gazed him full in the face, and he looked sheepish.</p>
			<p>"Lodovico mio," said she, "know this young Ser, of whom I have so often spoken to thee. Know him and love him, for he it was who saved thy wife and child."</p>
			<p>At these last words Lodovico, who had been bowing and grinning artificially, suddenly changed to an expression of heartfelt gratitude, and embraced Gerard warmly.</p>
			<p>Yet somehow there was something in the man's original manner, and his having followed his wife by stealth, that made Gerard uncomfortable under this caress. However he said, "We shall have your company, Ser Lodovico?"</p>
			<p>"No, signor," replied Lodovico, "I go not on that side Tiber."</p>
			<p>"Addio, then," said Teresa, significantly.</p>
			<p>"When shall you return home, Teresa mia?"</p>
			<p>"When I have done mine errand, Lodovico."</p>
			<p>They pursued their way in silence. Teresa now wore a sad and almost gloomy air.</p>
			<p>To be brief, Appia Claudia was merciful, and did not send them over Tiber again, but only a hundred yards down the street to Lucretia, who kept the glove shop; she it was wanted a writer: but what for Appia Claudia could not conceive. Lucretia was a merry little dame, who received them heartily enough, and told them she wanted no writer, kept all her accounts in her head. "It was for my confessor, Father Colonna; he is mad after them."</p>
			<p>"I have heard of his excellency," said Teresa.</p>
			<p>"Who has not?"</p>
			<p>"But, good dame, he is a friar; he has made vow of poverty. I cannot let the young man write and not be paid. He saved my child at sea."</p>
			<p>"Did he now?" And Lucretia cast an approving look on Gerard. "Well, make your mind easy; a Colonna never wants for money. The good father has only to say the word, and the princes of his race will pour a thousand crowns into his lap. And such a confessor, dame! the best in Rome. His head is leagues and leagues away all the while; he never heeds what you are saying. Why I think no more of confessing my sins to him than of telling them to that wall. Once, to try him, I confessed, along with the rest, as how I had killed my lodger's little girl and baked her in a pie. Well, when my voice left off confessing, he started out of his dream, and says he, a mustering up a gloom, 'My erring sister, say three paternosters and three ave Marias kneeling, and eat no butter nor eggs next Wednesday, and pax vobiscum!' and off a went with his hands behind him, looking as if there was no such thing as me in the world."</p>
			<p>Teresa waited patiently, then calmly brought this discursive lady back to the point: "Would she be so kind as go with this good youth to the friar and speak for him?"</p>
			<p>"Alack! how can I leave my shop? And what need? His door is aye open to writers, and painters, and scholars, and all such cattle. Why, one day he would not receive the Duke d'Urbino, because a learned Greek was closeted with him, and the friar's head and his so close together over a dusty parchment just come in from Greece, as you could put one cowl over the pair. His wench Onesta told me. She mostly looks in here for a chat when she goes an errand."</p>
			<p>"This is the man for thee, my friend," said Teresa.</p>
			<p>"All you have to do," continued Lucretia, "is to go to his lodgings (my boy shall show them you), and tell Onesta you come from me, and you are a writer, and she will take you up to him. If you put a piece of silver in the wench's hand, 'twill do you no harm: that stands to reason."</p>
			<p>"I have silver," said Teresa, warmly.</p>
			<p>"But stay," said Lucretia, "mind one thing. What the young man saieth he can do, that he must be able to do, or let him shun the good friar like poison. He is a very wild beast against all bunglers. Why, 'twas but t'other day, one brought him an ill-carved crucifix. Says he: 'Is this how you present 'Salvator Mundi?' who died for you in mortal agony; and you go and grudge him careful work. This slovenly gimcrack, a crucifix? But that it is a crucifix of some sort, and I am a holy man, I'd dust your jacket with your crucifix,' says he. Onesta heard every word through the keyhole; so mind."</p>
			<p>"Have no fears, madama," said Teresa, loftily. "I will answer for his ability; he saved my child."</p>
			<p>Gerard was not subtle enough to appreciate this conclusion: and was so far from sharing Teresa's confidence that he begged a respite. He would rather not go to the friar to-day: would not to-morrow do as well?</p>
			<p>"Here is a coward for ye," said Lucretia.</p>
			<p>"No, he is not a coward," said Teresa, firing up. "He is modest."</p>
			<p>"I am afraid of this high-born, fastidious friar," said Gerard. "Consider, he has seen the handywork of all the writers in Italy, dear dame Teresa; if you would but let me prepare a better piece of work than yet I have done, and then to-morrow I will face him with it."</p>
			<p>"I consent," said Teresa.</p>
			<p>They walked home together.</p>
			<p>Not far from his own lodging was a shop that sold vellum. There was a beautiful white skin in the window. Gerard looked at it wistfully; but he knew he could not pay for it; so he went on rather hastily. However, he soon made up his mind where to get vellum: and, parting with Teresa at his own door, ran hastily up stairs, and took the bond he had brought all the way from Sevenbergen, and laid it with a sigh on the table. He then prepared with his chemicals to erase the old writing; but, as this was his last chance of reading it, he now overcame his deadly repugnance to bad writing, and proceeded to decipher the deed in spite of its detestable contractions. It appeared by this deed that Ghysbrecht Van Swieten was to advance some money to Floris Brandt on a piece of land, and was to repay himself out of the rent.</p>
			<p>On this Gerard felt it would be imprudent and improper to destroy the deed. On the contrary he vowed to decipher every word, at his leisure. He went down stairs, determined to buy a small piece of vellum with his half of the card money.</p>
			<p>At the bottom of the stairs he found the landlady and Teresa talking. At sight of him the former cried: "Here he is. You are caught, donna mia. See what she has bought you!" And whipped out from under her apron the very skin of vellum Gerard had longed for.</p>
			<p>"Why, dame! why, donna Teresa!" And he was speechless, with pleasure and astonishment.</p>
			<p>"Dear donna Teresa, there is not a skin in all Rome like it. How ever came you to hit on this one? 'Tis glamour."</p>
			<p>"Alas, dear boy, did not thine eye rest on it with desire? and didst thou not sigh in turning away from it? And was it for Teresa to let thee want the thing after that?"</p>
			<p>"What sagacity! what goodness, madama! Oh, dame, I never thought I should possess this. What did you pay for it?"</p>
			<p>"I forget. Addio, Fiammina. Addio, Ser Gerard. Be happy, be prosperous, as you are good." And the Roman matron glided away, while Gerard was hesitating, and thinking how to offer to pay so stately a creature for her purchase.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The next day in the afternoon he went to Lucretia, and her boy took him to Fra Colonna's lodgings. He announced his business and feed Onesta, and she took him up to the friar. Gerard entered with a beating heart. The room, a large one, was strewed and heaped with objects of art, antiquity, and learning, lying about in rich profusion, and confusion. Manuscripts, pictures, carvings in wood and ivory, musical instruments; and in this glorious chaos sat the friar, poring intently over an Arabian manuscript.</p>
			<p>He looked up a little peevishly at the interruption. Onesta whispered in his ear.</p>
			<p>"Very well," said he. "Let him be seated. Stay; young man, show me how you write!" And he threw Gerard a piece of paper, and pointed to an inkhorn.</p>
			<p>"So please you, reverend father," said Gerard, "my hand, it trembleth too much at this moment; but last night I wrote a vellum page of Greek, and the Latin version by its side, to show the various character."</p>
			<p>"Show it me!"</p>
			<p>Gerard brought the work to him in fear and trembling; then stood, heart-sick, awaiting his verdict.</p>
			<p>When it came it staggered him. For the verdict was, a Dominican falling on his neck.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
